[New Concept] : functions (#2623)
exercism/python: concepts/functions/about.md

# About

> A [`function`][function] is a block of organized, reusable code that is used to perform a single, related action.

Reviewer: "single" implies one. "Related" implies multiple. Related to what?

> `Functions` provide better modularity for your application and a high degree of code reusing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Functions` provide better modularity for your application and a high degree of code reuse.
```

Better than what?

> Like other programming languages, python provides _pre-defined functions_ ([`print`][print], [`map`][map] etc) that are readily available in the Python language. 

Reviewer: These have a technical name: built-in functions. It would be good to use the proper name when they are first introduced. 
It might be good to link to them, too: `https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html`

Reviewer: This line also has both `python` and `Python`. Both are used throughout this file.

> However, you can define your own functions as well which are called [`user-defined functions`][user defined functions].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also define your own functions. Those are called [`user-defined functions`][user defined functions].
```

> Functions can be as simple as _printing a message to the console_ or as complex as _performing a calculation_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Functions can run something as simple as _printing a message to the console_ or they can be quite complex.
```

`a + b` is a calculation and is not very complex.

To execute the code inside a function, you need to call the function, which is done by using the function name followed by parenthesis [`()`].

> Data known as `parameters` can be passed to the function inside the parenthesis. Broader terms for parameters are `arguments`. Functions can perform different tasks depending on the value of the parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data. known as `parameters`, can be passed to the function by placing them inside the parenthesis. A broader term for parameters is `arguments`. Functions can perform different tasks depending on the value of the parameters.
```

> The function can also return a value using the `return` keyword. The value returned by the function is known as the `return value`. The return value is returned to the caller of the function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A function can also return a value using the `return` keyword. The value returned by the function is known as the `return value`. The return value is returned to the caller of the function.
```

Reviewer: Has "caller" been defined?

## Creation

> In python, functions are created using the `def` keyword. The function definition is followed by the function name and parenthesis [`()`]. Inside the parenthesis, the parameters are specified, and are separated by commas. After the parameters, the colon (`:`) is used to separate the function header from the function body.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In python, functions are created using the `def` keyword. The function definition is followed by the function name and parenthesis [`()`]. Inside the parenthesis, the parameters are specified, separated by commas. After the close parenthesis, the colon (`:`) is used to separate the function signature from the function body.
```

> The function body is a block of code that is executed when the function is called. The body of the function is indented. The indentation is important because the function body is a block of code. A value can be returned from the function by using the `return` keyword, which will be used by the caller of the function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The function body is a block of code that is executed when the function is called. The body of the function is indented. The indentation is important because Python relies on it to know where that block of code ends. A value can be returned from the function by using the `return` keyword, which can then be used by the caller of the function.
```

```python
def function_name(parameter1, parameter2, ...):
    # function body
    return value
```

We can also define a function without any parameters or return value.
```python
def function_name():
    # function body
```

## Calling a Function

> To call a function, use the function name followed by parenthesis [`()`]. The parameters passed to the function are separated by commas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To call a function, use the function name followed by parenthesis [`()`]. Parameters passed to the function are placed inside the parenthesis, separated by commas.
```

Consider the following function:
```python
def wish():
    print("Hello")
```

> Above function can be called by using the following syntax:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above function can be called by using the following syntax:
```

```python
>>> wish()
Hello
```

## Parameters

> Parameters are values that are passed to the function when it is called. They are known as `arguments`.

Reviewer: This document first mentions arguments, switches to parameters and is now saying they are known as arguments. One term should be used consistently.

> Let's define a function `add`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's define a function `add` which adds two numbers together:
```

```python
def add(x, y):
    print(x + y)
```

> When the function is called, the parameters are passed to the function. We need to pass values for both the parameters, otherwise [`TypeError`][type-error] will be raised.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the function is called, the parameters are passed to the function. We need to pass values for both the parameters, otherwise a [`TypeError`][type-error] will be raised.
```

```python
>>> add(2, 3)
5

# Function can be called multiple times, with different parameters
>>> add(4, 3)
7
>>> add(5, 6)
11

> # Passing incorrect number of parameters will raise `TypeError`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Passing an incorrect number of parameters will raise a `TypeError`
```

>>> add(2)
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
TypeError: add() missing 1 required positional argument: 'y'

>>> add(2, 3, 4)
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
TypeError: add() takes 2 positional arguments but 3 were given
```

## Return Value

> The return value is a value that is returned to the caller of the function. Return value can be of any data type. It can be used by caller of the function to perform further operations. If the function does not explicitly return a value, the value `None` is returned.

Reviewer: You call out that return values can be of any type. What about the parameter type? That was never mentioned.

Let's define a function `add`:
```python
def add(x, y):
    return x + y
```

> We'll store the return value in a variable and print it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can store the return value in a variable and then print it:
```

```python
>>> result = add(2, 3)
>>> print(result)
5
# Type of result is `int`
>>> type(result)
<class 'int'>

# We can also perform operations on the return value
>>> result * 2
10

> # Function without return value returns `None`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# A function without an explicit return value will return `None`
```

>>> def log(message):
    print(message)

# Hello is printed because of print(message), but return value is `None`
>>> return_value = log("Hello")
Hello
>>> return_value
None
```

Use of `return` immediately exits the function and returns the value to the caller.
```python
>>> def show(x, y):
    print(x)
    return x
    print(y)

> # y never gets printed, because function exists after return statement

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# y never gets printed, because the function exits after the return statement
```

>>> show(1, 2)
1
```

## Modularity

> Complex programs can be broken down into smaller parts. Functions can be used to perform different tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Complex programs can be broken down into smaller parts. Different functions can be used to perform different specific tasks.
```

Assume a program has to perform the following tasks:
  * Calculate the area of a circle
  * Calculate the area of a rectangle
  * Calculate the area of a triangle

We can break down the program into smaller parts.

```python
def circle_area(r):
    return 3.14 * r * r

def rectangle_area(length, breadth):
    return length * breadth

def triangle_area(base, height):
    return 0.5 * base * height
```

Now, we can call the functions in the order we want.

```python
>>> circle_area(2)
12.56
>>> rectangle_area(2, 3)
6
>>> triangle_area(2, 3)
1.5
```

## Scope of Variables

> If variable is defined inside a function, then it will be only accessible inside the function. If we want to access the variable outside the function, we need to use the [`global`][global] keyword. [`nonlocal`][nonlocal] keyword is used to access the variable inside a nested function.

Reviewer: `nonlocal` isn't commonly used and might be best left out of this. `global` isn't that common, either.

Author: Actually in learning Objective section of original issue #2353, these are mentioned.
Do you want me to remove these points?

Reviewer 2: It is in the learning objectives, so keep them. Even though they aren't "used often" that doesn't mean people shouldn't know what they are.

```python

> def outer():

Reviewer: `outer` implies an `inner`. Outer of what? Where's the inner?

    x = 10
    print('Inside function:', x)
```

variable `x` is defined inside the outer function. It is limited to the scope of the outer function only. It will not alter the value of the variable outside the outer function.

```python

> >>> x = 30

Reviewer: You may want to move this line *before* the function definition so the reader knows that there's a global `x` before the function is shown.

# regardless of whether we call the function or not, the value of x will be 30
>>> outer()
Inside function: 10
>>> x
30
```

We can access the variable inside the outer function using the `global` keyword.
```python
def outer():
    global x
    x = 10
    print('Inside function:', x)
```

As we have used the `global` keyword, the value of `x` will be changed.

```python
>>> x = 30
>>> outer()
Inside function: 10
>>> x
10
```

## Functions as first class objects

> In python, functions can be assigned to variables and passed as arguments to other functions. They can also be used as return values in other functions. Functions can also be used as items in a sequence([`list`][list], [`tuple`][tuple] etc) or as value in [`dict`][dict]. This is called _function as [`first class object`][first class objects]_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In python, functions can be assigned to variables and passed as arguments to other functions. They can be used as return values. Functions can also be placed into a sequence([`list`][list], [`tuple`][tuple] etc) or as value in a [`dict`][dict]. Functions can be used anywhere than any other object can be used. This is because _functions are [`first class objects`][first class objects]_.
```

```python
# print is a function

> # function can be assigned to a variable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# A function can be assigned to a variable.
```

> >>> fake_print = print

Reviewer: This looks like the real print but an alias.

>>> fake_print("Hello")
Hello
>>> type(fake_print)
<class 'builtin_function_or_method'>

> # function can be passed as an argument to another function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Functions can be passed as an argument to another function.
```

>>> def check_print(func):
    func("Hello")
>>> check_print(print)
Hello

> # function can be used as an item in a sequence

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Function can be used as an item in a sequence.
```

>>> my_list = [print, "Hello"]
>>> my_list[0]("Hello")
Hello

> # function can be used as a value in a dictionary

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Functions can be used as a value in a dictionary.
```

>>> my_dict = {"key": print}
>>> my_dict["key"]("Hello")
Hello

> # function can be used as a return value in another function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Functions can be returned from a function.
```

>>> def return_func():
    return print
>>> return_func()("Hello")
Hello
```

Functions can also be nested inside other functions.
```python
def outer():
    x = 10

>     def inner():

Reviewer: This is not used often and is often not good practice. Maybe it should be skipped.

Reviewer 2: Please read the connected issue before reviewing. `nested functions` is in the concepts of #2353. Keep nested functions in the exercise.

Nested functions are not bad practice at all. They can be used to access the enclosing namespace. If such function is only used by one other function, then you could opt in to use `nested` or `inner functions`.

Reviewer 2: If you really would like these gone. Throw up an issue on the repo. We could either then put this issue on hold, or merge this issue (if everything else is okay) and then change the docs afterwards.

Reviewer 3: I think [issue 2353](https://github.com/exercism/python/issues/2353) is pretty clear. The intent of this exercise is to dig deeper into Python functions - both as a "next step" for students and as an introduction into `higher order functions` and FP.  As well as more practice before students are "hit" with all the function parameter options, and unpacking actions (function arguments exercise).

Python's object model (as opposed to Javas object model, for example) treats `function objects` as first-class citizens.  It is possible (perhaps not _advisable_) to write nested functions -- or even constructs  where one function encloses multiple other functions. Students need to know that -- even if they don't end up using it all that often.

And that also helps teach scope (along with locals and globals) -- which (we hope) leads eventually to understanding what a `closure` is, and why you'd want one, and other things like `decorators`.

Reviewer 3: This was not intended as a "basic" exercise.  We have `lasgana` -- and all the exercises in-between for that.  Students would not be taking on this exercise until after they finished all the exercises on data structures and sequences and more.

        print(x)
    inner()
```

The inner function can access the variable `x` defined in the outer function.

```python
>>> outer()
10
```

> ## Special Attributes

Reviewer: This is another section that might not be well suited for teaching the concept of functions.

Reviewer 2: Please reply to the connected issue with your concerns, since it is inside of the concepts. This is not the place for such discussions.

> Functions in python have some special attributes. Some of them are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Functions in python have special attributes. Some of them are:
```

  * `__name__`: Name of the function
  * `__doc__`: Documentation string of the function
  * `__module__`: Module in which the function is defined
  * `__globals__`: Dictionary of global variables in the function
  * `__code__`: Code object containing the instructions of the function

```python
>>> def add(x, y):
      return x + y

# Function name
>>> print.__name__
'print'
>>> len.__name__
'len'
>>> add.__name__
'add'

# Function documentation
>>> abs.__doc__
'Return the absolute value of the argument.'

# Module
>>> len.__module__
'builtins'
>>> add.__module__
'__main__'
```

> Full list of attributes can be found at [Python DataModel][attributes].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The full list of function attributes can be found at [Python DataModel][attributes].
```
